Add basic executors design doc. (#168)
BranchTaken/Hemlock: doc/design/executors.md

# Executors

Executors are responsible for coordinating actor execution, global garbage collection, and managing
I/O operations. During runtime, a Hemlock process has an on-to mapping of executor to CPU core. The
number of executors is a dynamic property of a Hemlock process. In cases where enough
parallelization exists, the runtime creates enough executors to utilize all cores, making it a
one-to-one mapping as well.

## Lookup array

Live executors are discoverable via a global array. The array is large enough to hold one pointer
for each of the possible executors. The current number of executors `n` indicates that executors
`[0,n)` in the array are live. Upon initialization, live exectors are atomically emplaced in the
list at `executors[n]` while `n` is incremented.

Hemlock load balancing algorithms randomly inspect executors within this array, so there is no need
for mechanisms to look up specific executors.

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

- If the actor is Idle, it is waiting on its mailbox and it may have used much less than its entire
  quantum. To give it a fair opportunity to use more of its allocated quantum on this turn of the
  wheel. It is placed into the idle, timed-out set `N * (fraction of quantum used)` segments forward and
  preserves its remaining reduction limit.

The executor maintains a set of idle actors. Any actor in this set that becomes runnable is given
priority and run at the first opportunity. While no actors in the idle set are runnable, the
executor processes each segment of the scheduler wheel in turn. Immediately upon turning to a new
segment, any idle, timed-out actors that have become runnable are run again, but only with the
preserved remaining reduction limit. The idle, timed-out actors that are still idle are joined with
the executor's set of idle actors. Then, each actor in the runnable queue is run in turn for a
maximum of a single quantum.

## Load statistics

Load statistics are recorded in the local `ectx`. Any executor may inspect another executor's load
statistics at any time.

Jason and I chatted about reporting load as `load = 1 / wheel turn rate`. It has the same curve as

> `1/x`, which is monotonic and continuous, but

Reviewer: Partial sentence.

  follow-up message for the I/O completion.

If idle actors become active, normal load balancing mechanisms kick in to migrate based on current,
non-speculative load statistics.

## I/O cancellation

## Supervisors
### Strategies
#### Graph

DAG of actor dependencies that determines startup order.

#### CPU selection

- Pinned
- NUMA groups
- Big/little CPU

#### Crash recovery
- pattern
   - one
   - upstream
   - downstream
   - all
- times
   - n
   - n in t time window

## Actors

### States
- Receiving - Waiting for messages in the mailbox.
- Runnable - In the `Runnable` queue, waiting to be run by the executor.
- Running - Actively running.
- Halted - Halted and requires cleanup and possibly supervisor actions.

### Time slice procedures

Between each time slice, the executor is responsible for the following.
1. Reap any CQEs from the ioring's completion queue. Determine which actor is associated with the
   CQE. Copy the CQE to the location pointed to by the CQE's `user_data` field. If the actor is...
   a. Not managed by the executor - send a message to the managing executor with a hint that the
   actor should be activated.

>    b. `Receiving` - move the actor from the `Receiving` list to the `Runnable` queue.

Reviewer: This doesn't render correctly, perhaps due to under-indentation of line 151.

2. If actor placed any SQEs in the ioring, submit it via `io_uring_submit`.
3. If the actor state is...
   a. `Receiving` - place it at the head of the idle actor list.
   b. `Runnable` - place it at the tail of the active actor queue.

>    c. `Halted` - place a message in the actor's supervisor's mailbox and place the actor in the halted actor list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   c. `Halted` - place a message in the actor's supervisor's mailbox and place the actor in the halted actor list.
```

# Executors

Executors are responsible for coordinating actor execution, global garbage collection, and managing
I/O operations. During runtime, a Hemlock process has an on-to mapping of executor to CPU core. The
number of executors is a dynamic property of a Hemlock process. In cases where enough
parallelization exists, the runtime creates enough executors to utilize all cores, making it a
one-to-one mapping as well.

## Lookup array

Live executors are discoverable via a global array. The array is large enough to hold one pointer
for each of the possible executors. The current number of executors `n` indicates that executors

> `[0,n)` in the array are live. Upon initialization, live exectors are atomically emplaced (via `m`)

Author: This was left over from an over-explanation of the necessity for a mutex.

> `[0,n)` in the array are live. Upon initialization, live exectors are atomically emplaced (via `m`)
> in the list at `executors[n]` while `n` is incremented.

Author: ```suggestion
`[0,n)` in the array are live. Upon initialization, live exectors are atomically emplaced in the
list at `executors[n]` while `n` is incremented.
```

> ```c
> pthread_mutex_t mutex;
> size_t n;
> hm_executor_t executors[];
> 
> void executors_emplace(hm_executor_t * executor) {
>    pthread_mutex_lock(&mutex)
>    executors[n] = executor;
>    n++;
> }
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Let's just drop this code from the doc. We're not necessarily going to use a mutex here, and this deadlocks as written. :wink:

Hemlock load balancing algorithms randomly inspect executors within this array, so there is no need
for mechanisms to look up specific executors.

> ## Initialization
> 
> Whenever a pthread is created in the Hemlock runtime, its affinity is pinned to a specific CPU. The
> thread is tasked with bootstrapping a new executor, adding the executor to the global lookup array,
> and ceding control to the executor.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## CPU affinity

> The initial thread simply pins itself to current CPU.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

When an executor must select a CPU to pin a new thread on, it prioritizes in the following order.

> - Any unclaimed CPU within the NUMA group of the current executor.
> - Any unclaimed CPU within the NUMA group of another executor.
> - Any unclaimed CPU.

Author: ```suggestion
- We discussed three options and need to figure out what's best.
  - Depth-first
    - Any unclaimed CPU within the NUMA group of the current executor.
    - Any unclaimed CPU within the NUMA group of another executor.
    - Any unclaimed CPU.
  - Breadth-first
    - ...
  - Random
    - ...
```

- If the actor is Idle, it is waiting on its mailbox and it may have used much less than its entire
  quantum. To give it a fair opportunity to use more of its allocated quantum on this turn of the
  wheel. It is placed into the idle, timed-out set `N * (percent quantum used)` segments forward and
  preserves its remaining reduction limit.

The executor maintains a set of idle actors. Any actor in this set that becomes runnable is given
priority and run at the first opportunity. While no actors in the idle set are runnable, the
executor processes each segment of the scheduler wheel in turn. Immediately upon turning to a new
segment, any idle, timed-out actors that have become runnable are run again, but only with the
preserved remaining reduction limit. The idle, timed-out actors that are still idle are joined with
the executor's set of idle actors. Then, each actor in the runnable queue is run in turn for a
maximum of a single quantum.

## Load statistics

Load statistics are recorded in the local `ectx`. Any executor may inspect another executor's load
statistics at any time.

Jason and I chatted about reporting load as `load = 1 / wheel turn rate`. It has the same curve as

> `1/x`, which is monotonic and continuos, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`1/x`, which is monotonic and continuous, but
```

Reviewer: Partial sentence.

TODO - Look at how load is calculated on Linux and FreeBSD.

## Actor migration

> Actors that may be migraded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actors that may be migrated.
```

> - (Discussed with Jason. Not so sure about this one) Runnable actors that have just yielded. Upon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Discussed with Jason. Not so sure about this one.) Runnable actors that have just yielded. Upon
```

>   yielding, the executor will inspect N other random executors to compare load statistics. Based on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  yielding, the executor will inspect `N` other random executors to compare load statistics. Based on
```

>   the comparison, the executor may migrate the actor.  Additionally, the sending executor will not
>   ascribe the just-run actor's reductions to itself in its own load statistics, but the recieving
>   executor will. Doing so causes the change in load to show up almost immediately in load
>   statistics. The receiving executor schedules the actor `N` segments forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the comparison, the executor may migrate the actor.  The receiving executor schedules the actor `N` segments forward.
```

> - (Jason and I mentioned finding an actor somewhere in the wheel that we'd expect to run around the
>   same time as the end of the receiving executor's runnable tail).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (We discussed finding an actor somewhere in the wheel that we'd expect to run around the
  same time as the end of the receiving executor's runnable tail).
```

- Idle actors that have just become runnable. The executor will inspect N other random executors to
  compare load statistics. Based on the comparison, the executor may migrate the actor.

Actors that may not be migrated.
- Posse members, at least not to executors that are part of the cabal.

> - Actors marked as pinned by their supervisor startup strategy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Actors marked as pinned.
```

- Big/little CPU

#### Crash recovery
- pattern
   - one
   - upstream
   - downstream
   - all
- times
   - n
   - n in t time window

## Actors

### Time slice procedures

Between each time slice, the executor is responsible for the following.
1. Reap any CQEs from the ioring's completion queue. Determine which actor is associated with the
   CQE. Copy the CQE to the location pointed to by the CQE's `user_data` field. If the actor is...
   a. Not managed by the executor - send a message to the managing executor with a hint that the
   actor should be activated.
   b. `Receiving` - move the actor from the `Receiving` list to the `Runnable` queue.
2. If actor placed any SQEs in the ioring, submit it via `io_uring_submit`.
3. If the actor state is...
   a. `Receiving` - place it at the head of the idle actor list.
   b. `Runnable` - place it at the tail of the active actor queue.
   c. `Halted` - place a message in the actor's supervisor's mailbox and place the actor in the halted actor list

### Supervisors

### States
- Waiting - Waiting for messages in the mailbox.
- Runnable - In the `Runnable` queue, waiting to be run by the executor.
- Running - Actively running.

> - Halted - Halted and requires cleanup and possibly supervisor actions.

Reviewer: It looks like `Receiving` and `Waiting` are identical? Also, the "States" subsection should come before "Time slice procedures" so that the definitions are stated before first use.
